---
layout: post
title: Favorite machine learning papers: phonetic evolution
math: true
---

My other favorite machine learning paper [reconstructs common ancestors of human languages using a phonetic language evolution model](https://www.pnas.org/content/110/11/4224). I am so awestruck by this. The abstract speaks for itself:

> One of the oldest problems in linguistics is reconstructing the words that appeared in the protolanguages from which modern languages evolved. Identifying the forms of these ancient languages makes it possible to evaluate proposals about the nature of language change and to draw inferences about human history. Protolanguages are typically reconstructed using a painstaking manual process known as the comparative method. We present a family of probabilistic models of sound change as well as algorithms for performing inference in these models. The resulting system automatically and accurately reconstructs protolanguages from modern languages. We apply this system to 637 Austronesian languages, providing an accurate, large-scale automatic reconstruction of a set of protolanguages. Over 85% of the system’s reconstructions are within one character of the manual reconstruction provided by a linguist specializing in Austronesian languages. Being able to automatically reconstruct large numbers of languages provides a useful way to quantitatively explore hypotheses about the factors determining which sounds in a language are likely to change over time. We demonstrate this by showing that the reconstructed Austronesian protolanguages provide compelling support for a hypothesis about the relationship between the function of a sound and its probability of changing that was first proposed in 1955.

Can you believe that?? Accurate automated reconstruction of extinct languages! Automated construction of linguistic family trees! 

I love that they model words as sequences of sounds rather than sequences of letters. This seems hard, and it allows realistic evolution of words, e.g. by dropping syllables ("alright" becomes "aight") or changing to nearby sounds (British-style "little" becomes American-style "liddle"). It also allows them to quantitatively test the "functional load hypothesis": "sounds that play a more important role in distinguishing words are less likely to change over time."

I enjoy outrageous jargon for its own sake, so I relished their mention of "lenitions, epentheses, and elisions" as sound transformations that their model could accomodate. Lenition is weakening of a consonant, as in "little Wayne ==> liddle Wayne". Elision is full-on removal of a sound: "liddle Wayne ==> Li'l Wayne"; "Ca est la vie ==> C'est la vie". Epentheses is the plural of "epenthesis", which means inserting an extra sound: Hampshire [didn't start out with a 'p'](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hampshire#Name), and my friend says his name is pronounced "joo-AWN". 